# Overview

This repository is the entrance to the software that stems from paper [Fast Parallel Algorithms for Euclidean MST and HDBSCAN*](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2104.01126.pdf) presented at SIGMOD 2021. The actual software is hosted under open-source project Pargeo, which is included as a submodule of this repository. Please follow the link to [Pargeo](https://github.com/wangyiqiu/pargeo) for further details on running the software. Specifically, these are the links to the directories containing [clustering algorithms including HDBSCAN*](https://github.com/wangyiqiu/pargeo/tree/main/clustering) and [EMST](https://github.com/wangyiqiu/pargeo/tree/main/euclideanMst) respectively.

The paper presents new parallel algorithms for generating Euclidean minimum spanning trees and spatial clustering hierarchies (known as HDBSCAN∗). Our approach is based on generating a well-separated pair decomposition followed by using Kruskal's minimum spanning tree algorithm and bichromatic closest pair computations. We introduce a new notion of well-separation to reduce the work and space of our algorithm for HDBSCAN∗. We also present a parallel approximate algorithm for OPTICS based on a recent sequential algorithm by Gan and Tao. Finally, we give a new parallel divide-and-conquer algorithm for computing the dendrogram and reachability plots, which are used in visualizing clusters of different scale that arise for both EMST and HDBSCAN∗. We show that our algorithms are theoretically efficient: they have work (number of operations) matching their sequential counterparts, and polylogarithmic depth (parallel time).

We implement our algorithms and propose a memory optimization that requires only a subset of well-separated pairs to be computed and materialized, leading to savings in both space (up to 10x) and time (up to 8x). Our experiments on large real-world and synthetic data sets using a 48-core machine show that our fastest algorithms outperform the best serial algorithms for the problems by 11.13--55.89x, and existing parallel algorithms by at least an order of magnitude.

